welcome to today's briefing I'm pleased
to be joined by Professor Steve powers
the national medical director at NHS
England first of all I would like to
update you on the latest data in respect
of the coronavirus response so first of
all two million nine hundred and sixty
two thousand two hundred and twenty
seven tests for corona virus have now
been carried out in the United Kingdom
and that includes one hundred and
seventy seven thousand two hundred and
sixteen tests which were carried out
yesterday two hundred and forty eight
thousand two hundred and ninety three
people have tested positive that's an
increase of two thousand four hundred
and seventy two cases since yesterday
nine thousand nine hundred and fifty
three people are currently in hospital
with corona virus that is down thirteen
percent from eleven thousand four
hundred and forty three this time last
week and sadly of those who have tested
positive for corona virus across all
settings thirty five thousand seven
hundred and four have now sadly died
that is an increase of three hundred and
sixty three fatalities since yesterday
and of course my thoughts are with every
one of the families of those people who
have been affected by this and before we
begin questions from the public and from
the media I just want to remind people
of the details of the next phase of our
fight against corona virus so slide one
please so as you'll see from slide one
first in order to monitor our progress
we're establishing a new co vid alert
level system with five levels each
relating to the level of threat posed by
the virus the alert system will be based
primarily on the r-value and the number
of corona virus cases and in turn that
alert level will determine the level of
social distancing measures in place the
lower the level the fewer the measures
the higher the level the stricter the
measures and throughout the period of
lockdown which started on March the 23rd
we've been at level four but thanks to
the hard work and sacrifices of the
British people in this lockdown we've
helped to bring the R level down and
we're now in a position to begin moving
to level
three in careful steps maybe have slide
to please so as you'll see from this
slide we have set out the first of three
steps we will take to carefully modify
the measures gradually ease the lock
down and begin to allow people to return
to their normal way of life but
crucially avoiding what would be a
disastrous second peak which overwhelms
the NHS and after each step we will
closely monitor the impact of that step
on our and a number of infections and
all the available data and we will only
take the next step when we are satisfied
that it is safe to do so so step one as
the Prime Minister announced this week
those who cannot work from home should
now speak to their employer about going
back to work you can spend time outdoors
and exercise as often as you like and
you can meet one person outside your
household in an outdoor public place
provided that you stay two metres apart
slide three please so as you'll see from
slide three having taken the first step
in carefully adjusting some of the
measures and our advice on what people
can do we've also updated what we are
asking people to do which is to stay
alert control the virus and save lives
yes staying alert for the vast majority
of people still means staying at home as
much as possible but there are a range
of other actions that we're advising
people to take so people should stay
alert by working from home if you can
limiting contact with other people
keeping distance if you go out two
metres apart where possible and washing
your hands regularly wearing face
covering when you're in enclosed spaces
where it's difficult to be socially
distant so for example in some shops and
on public transport
and if you or anyone in your household
has symptoms you all need to self
isolate because if everyone stays alert
and follows the rules we can control
coronavirus by keeping the are down and
reducing the number of infections this
is how we can continue to save lives and
livelihoods
as we begin as a nation to recover from
coronavirus now over the past months
we've all naturally been focused on the
huge life-or-death health implications
of this pandemic but I'd now like to
provide an update on some of the crucial
work taking place behind the scenes to
support and protect the things that give
our lives added meaning such as sport
art tourism and our charities music and
theatres and when we look back on the
coronavirus one of the things we'll
remember is the incredible contribution
made by so many people and as a way of
showing our national gratitude to these
everyday kovat heroes we're announcing
today that we are delaying her Majesty
the Queen's Birthday Honours List until
the autumn so that they can be
recognized and celebrated and as the
prime minister said today I'm delighted
that Her Majesty the Queen has approved
a knighthood for captain Tom Moore in
recognition of his outstanding
achievement in raising nearly 33 million
pounds for NHS charities and captain tom
said a marker of generosity and the
public have matched it incredibly it now
looks as if British people and
businesses have now contributed over 800
million pounds and that's just through
national fundraising campaigns alone and
a great deal more has obviously been
raised at local levels and as the
British people have generously given
their time and their money the
government has sought to back them every
step of the way so we promised to match
every penny raised by the BBC's big
night in campaign and after a fantastic
public response I'm delighted to
announce today that over 70 million
pounds is now being distributed by comic
relief children in need and the national
emergencies trust to charities on the
front line now this comes on top of the
hundreds of millions of pounds we've
already announced the charity is doing
vital work to support those suffering
from poor mental health to help the
victims of domestic abuse and to make
sure hospices can continue to care for
families in these most difficult
circumstances and today I'm pleased to
confirm that the government's dedicated
support scheme for small and medium
sized chair
is the coronavirus community support
fund will open for applications this
week initially there'll be a two hundred
million pound tranche of government
funding and this will be administered by
the National Lottery Community Fund and
this will focus on those charities we
may not know nationally but who are a
lifeline to communities at a local level
and on top of that I can also announce
today that we're releasing 150 million
pounds from dormant accounts to help
social enterprises get affordable credit
to people who are financially vulnerable
and to support charities tackling youth
unemployment so our charities both large
and small have really been at the
forefront of this national effort to
defeat the coronavirus and together all
of this amounts to a multi-billion pound
boost for britain's charities and I know
that people are also eager for news of
the return of light sports and the arts
and I know that the last few months -
felt rather odd without them and our our
calendars have been strangely bare
finding creative crowd free ways to
navigate coronavirus is the biggest
challenge for our recreation and leisure
sectors right now so this week I'm
setting up a renewal task force which
will help them bounce back it'll be made
up of the brightest and the best from
creative tech and sporting worlds these
are experts in their field and they'll
be advising me on how they find new and
different ways to get industries back up
and running and just to give a few
examples it includes Alex Scott a former
lioness and Olympian and now an
award-winning broadcaster and she will
help us think through how we can get
sport back safely in a way that works
for both clubs players and supporters
alike similarly Lord Grade former
chairman of both the BBC and ITV will
provide an insight as to how we get our
creative media industries back up and
flourishing again and tomorrow rojo the
English National Ballet
artistic director will give us ideas for
how we start to get our arts scene back
up and running and Martha Lane Fox well
known as founder of lastminute.com
will advise on how tech can power all of
this recovery across all these sectors
but particularly in tourism as part of
the much wider role it
play in driving our economy forward as
it has done already meanwhile bit by bit
we are developing guidance that's
helping some of the lighter bits of our
economy return to this new normal so we
had supported the safe return of TV
production meaning our broadcasters are
able to keep some of our favorite shows
back on the TV screens whether that's
Cory or EastEnders we've helped to
reopen the country's tennis and
basketball courts and guided at least
that athletes back into training safely
and that in turn will pave the way for
the return of life sports behind closed
doors in the near future normal life as
we've known it is still clearly a long
way off and the path to get there is a
narrow one but these things will return
when it's safe for them to do so and
thanks to the same drive and creativity
that makes a great performance or a
great piece of art and I really think
that when they do and when we've come
overcome this crisis together we'll
appreciate them that much more and with
that I'll hand over to Professor Steve
powers thank you very much secretary
safe and good afternoon if I could go
through the data slides for today with
which I'm sure you have become familiar
so the first slide shows information on
social distancing and how the British
public have responded to the requests
that we all socially distance in order
to reduce the rate at which the virus
the corona virus is transmitted through
our communities and as I've said before
it's only by doing that that we will
keep this under control that we will
reduce the number of deaths that we have
unfortunately seen and the number of
admissions to the NHS and the pressure
on the NHS so this slide shows a number
of graphs data from both vehicle
mobility so transport in cars and like
vehicles and heavy goods vehicles and
you can see there has been a slow
increase in vehicle movements probably
recently reflecting the desire for
people who can return to work who can't
work from home returning but on public
transport national rail transport for
london and bus outside of london you can
see that the lev
rules of usage are still very low and
very much down on what they were before
social distancing measures were
introduced so again evidence that the
breach public has responded to and
complied with the instructions that
we've all been given on the next slide
we start to look at testing and the
number of new cases that are test
positive and as you've heard from the
Secretary of State there has been an
increase in recent weeks both in the
capacity of testing and in the number of
people who are being tested and you can
see that at the graph at the start we're
now nearly up to three million tests
that have been for poor performed in
total in the lower graph you can see the
number of daily confirmed cases and
again as I've said recently that
although the texting capacity is
increased and the number of tests has
increased the number of daily confirmed
cases has not increased and in fact is
stable or perhaps even falling and I
think that shows that the amount of
transmission the amount of virus in the
community is falling and with an hour
rate less than one that is exactly what
we would expect in the next slide we'll
see how that translates into the usage
of hospitals now once again for the vast
majority of people this is a mild
illness that does not require hospital
care but for a minority of people
unfortunately hospital admission is
required and for the sickest of course
that might require a period on our
intensive care units so this shows the
new daily admissions with kovat 19 from
March through to now you can see that
that is on a decline so we are seeing
fewer and fewer daily admissions again
showing the benefits of social
distancing and then in the bottom graph
you can see that group of individuals
who unfortunately are a sickest and
require ventilation so they need to be
put on a ventilator and mechanically
ventilated those are obviously occurs in
our intensive care units and and those
areas that we are we are using as part
of our expanded capacity to do this and
you can see again that that number is
falling across all parts are of the UK
again reflecting the benefits of social
distancing
next slide shows more data in hospital
and I would highlight that the number of
people in hospital is now below 10,000
so I think that's the first time since
March that we have seen a fall that has
come down below 10,000 in terms of the
people who are actively in hospital with
test positive for kovat 19 you can see
in the individual chart showing various
parts of the UK that the fall the
decline has been steepest in London that
had the highest peak but also you will
see declines in other areas of the
country at different rates but all
heading surely in the right direction
sort of fall in the number of people in
hospital and then in the next slide
finally we show the number of deaths and
you have heard the numbers for today
clearly it's with great sadness that we
report these deaths but you see on a
daily basis that looking at the key
figure the seven-day rolling average
which takes out the variation between
days and particularly the reporting
variation at weekends you can see that
the trend is now consistently downwards
and that will continue to fall as long
as we all comply with the instructions
that we've been given around social
distancing so this is not the time to -
as I said before to become complacent
about this yes if you can't work at home
then I talk to your employer about
getting to work but we need to remain
vigilant we need to stay alert and we
need to make sure that we keep that
important r0 but our number below 1 so
that the rate of transmission is
continually declining in the population
thank you thank you thank you very much
for that very clear presentation we now
turn to questions first of all we're
going to go to Thomas from the northwest
and he's joining us by video good
afternoon
please can you give an update on what
the UK is doing to help the poorer
nations through this pandemic thank you
well thank you very much for that
question Thomas and it's a really
important question the first thing that
we've done to help poorer nations is
we're standing by our commitment
to the poorest nations by devoting not
0.7% of our entire national income to
going to aid and that despite all the
challenges we have faced during the
coronavirus and all the pressures on
public spending we are maintaining that
commitment and I know there's a lot of
concern about where the poorer nations
are going to be able to access vaccines
that's why through the Garvey program we
were also ensure that we get those
vaccines at an affordable level working
with our aid budget to those poorest
nations fulfilling I think the what
we've always done as a nation we've
always stood by the poorest nations in
in time of need and I think that's part
of the moral responsibility we show as a
nation I think now we have question
number two and that is from Heather in
Devon so just to read that out Heather
asks I like many others have had medical
reviews delayed as nurses who conducted
them were redeployed to the frontline
and are currently still working in
hospitals how long will it be before
those NHS staff can go back to their
normal jobs well first of all I'd like
to pay tribute Heather to all of the
nurses and other frontline staff in the
NHS you've done so much during this
crisis to help us tackle it and through
that crisis and thanks to their hard
work we have avoided the NHS being
overwhelmed but clearly in moving that
capacity to the frontline to deal with
coronavirus it has had knock-on
consequences elsewhere as we now move
out of the peak and we're working of
course to ensure that we don't have a
second peak where the NHS is overwhelmed
there is more capacity again so we can
start delivering a more capacity to deal
with these sort of challenges but
professor Sonia yes so thank you Heather
and I too would like to pay tribute to
all my colleagues in the NHS you've
worked so magnificently over the last
few months to deal with the surge in
patients that we've seen with kovat 19
and it is it's the case that some of
those staff have had to be redeployed
they've had to work in different areas
and and sometimes they've had to work
with a set of skills that they have but
they they haven't had to use it use in
recent years and I think it's been truly
inspiring the way people have stood up
and taking that task and delivered for
the the public in this country as I've
said many times before in the NHS we
have kept our emergency services going
throughout this and so if you have
symptoms that you're worried about maybe
symptoms of you're worried about heart
attack or a stroke if you've got a child
with severe asthma then don't be afraid
to use the NHS as you've always used it
it is still there for you yes we are
managing and have been managing an equal
number of people with kovat 19 but the
NHS is there for emergency conditions
and it's really important you don't
delay getting in touch with us through
one one one through four calling your GP
or in extreme circumstances dialling 999
we've also kept services such as cancer
going throughout this there has been
some disruption and and some patients I
know have been advised by their
clinicians not to have treatment
immediately because for instance if
their immune system is being is being
treated as part of their cancer
treatment is being depressed then there
may be reason not to do that at a time
when virus is circulating but now that
we've come over the peak we are in a
position as a sacred site says to start
to build up those NHS services where
we've had to redeploy staff and perhaps
that we have had to delay so you will
see over the next weeks and months are
standing up of all those NHS services so
that the routine reviews can start to be
done again but I'm sure everybody
understands that at a time of public
emergency where we saw that surge in the
virus over April it was the right thing
to do to make sure that our staff were
focused on the response to that but now
we can start to get back towards normal
although a new normal because we will
have to do that in the context of still
having some underlying kovat 9:19 in the
community thank you now I think we come
to the next question and that's from
Nick what for the BBC Nikki you there
thank you I have a question for you
secretary of state and a question for
professor Parris so Oliver Dowden in his
televised addressed earlier this month
the Prime
talked about the awful epidemic in care
homes and this morning your cabinet
colleague Robert Buckland acknowledged
that care homes were given less priority
for testing than the NHS at the start of
this crisis and then he said sadly there
were far too many cases of infection and
deaths in care homes and yet at Prime
Minister's Questions today Boris Johnson
appeared to brush aside concerns and
questions about the level of testing in
the early stages of this public
emergency so what is it
gloss over possible mistakes in the past
or face up to the fact as Robert
Buckland said that maybe things could
have been done differently and for
professor powers can I ask you your
scientific colleague Dame Angela MacLean
said yesterday in answer to a question
of all the schools can open on the 1st
of June she said that you need to have a
highly effective track trace and
isolation system in place today the
Prime Minister said that there will be a
test track and trace system it will be
in place he said by the 1st of June now
given that there have been sort of
moving about on the dates about when
this might happen from ministers are you
confident professor Paris that the
McLean conditions will be met given that
there are concerns over the app and
whilst there will be 25,000 trackers who
will be able to track 10,000 cases a day
and yes that is four times the number of
confirmed cases that is probably well
below the number of actual cases in the
UK well thank you for that question
Nick ippatsu I deal with the first one
about glossing over and then hand over
to some pals it is categorically not the
case that we have glossed over this
ninth the Prime Minister has been very
clear about the challenges that we face
in care homes and of course every death
in the care home is it's one to many but
that is precisely why we have introduced
this care home action plan that means
there's more money going into care homes
for example an extra six hundred million
pounds was announced very recently
that's
we're ramping up the testing in care
homes that's why we're ramping up the
protective equipment for care homes why
for example we've introduced a dedicated
hotline so that they can get that
protective equipment into care homes and
actually as a result of those measures
whilst the numbers remain too high the
indicators suggest that we are moving in
the right direction with that is
reducing number of deaths or reducing
number of new infections steam house yes
so maybe going back to the first
principle about the the yogoro strategy
what's important is to keep the are the
are number below worn as I've said a
little bit earlier because it's only by
keeping the are below 1 that the rate of
transmission falls in the community in
other words the amount that is being
passed on from person to person is less
than 1 on average and therefore the
infection rate is going down and and you
achieve that in a variety of ways and
track and trace is one component of the
measures that will need to be kept in
place at least in the foreseeable future
to ensure the AR is below one so the
first point I'd make is is as as Angela
said yesterday track and trace and an
effective track and trace strategy in
place is a very important component of
keeping the infection under control but
it's not the only thing it needs to be
seen combined with other social
distancing measures that over time as we
as the strategy towards a virus and the
community evolves may may be relaxed but
tracking trace is not the only thing
that needs to be to be in place and I
think as the government has said clearly
timing is an issue for government we can
advise but it's a question for
government I know the government would
want to see I think they've said that
they need to have the context that there
will not be a rise of our above one in
order to move in the subsequent steps of
any release of lockdown measures so
track and trace yes very important but
it's just one of the measures that we
will need to keep in place going forward
to ensure the transmission rates stay
below one Nick would you like to ask any
follow-ups yes
come back to you Oliver down you're
saying that you're not glossing over
anything but there was a very different
tone from Robert Buckland today when he
was saying maybe things could have been
done differently and it's well-known
that mistakes honest mistakes may well
have been made particularly in the
beginning phase of this public emergency
and wouldn't it do this government some
good wouldn't it do the government
scientists some goods if you followed
the example of Emmanuel macron and
acknowledged admitted were open about
those there's going to be a public
inquiry you're going to be called up
before that public inquiry so why not
begin that conversation now well of
course in any public health crisis like
this there will be a time for lessons to
be learned afterwards but I think the
public rightly wants us now to be
focusing on dealing with this that is
why we have introduced the NHS care
homes action plan having the
consequences I described and on some of
the points you raised for example in
relation to people who have been
discharged from hospitals into care
homes actually the number is discharged
in march/april were 40% lower than those
in January and it has been the case that
testing has been available to care homes
right from the very beginning and it has
been the case that that we have issued
guidance right for them very very
beginning of course they're always
lessons to be learned but I think it is
worth reflecting on on those things
thank you for that question now over to
Robert Peston good afternoon
remarkable nature out of public health
England today in the last 24 hours
the latest 24-hour period apparently
there were zero cases of corona virus or
new cases in London so presumably there
will be a return to school in the
capital at least for the youngest
children and more store still stores
opening least in the capital and a
separate one for professor Paris the
Prime Minister today said in the House
of Commons that no older people will
return to care homes without the
approval of a clinician which seems to
many is that the Prime Minister is in a
sense passing the blame for ceding kovat
19 in care homes to doctors and nurses
what do you think of that professor
Paris well perhaps should I start with
your first question Robert about the
opening up process and you you reference
some of the the promising figures I'd
also just it is worth reflecting again
on those those test numbers we're in out
to one hundred and seventy seven
thousand two hundred and sixteen tests
so it's not just the numbers that are
moving in the right direction although
of course we have to be highly cautious
about it but also the the government
response continues to to ramp up now the
Prime Minister set out the path that we
will go down in terms of easing the
lockdown he set out this a three-stage
process the next stage and we said from
the earliest will be from the beginning
of June we will look at some of the
measures that you discussed around for
example opening up a non-essential
retail in respect to the question about
schools I really think we should try and
open schools if we possibly can and a
lot of work I know my friend the health
sector the education secretary has put a
lot of work in has indeed has the health
secretary about thinking about how we
can do that safely whether that is
staggering entry times whether it is
keeping children together in groups of
15 and the reason for doing all of that
is because I think there's very strong
evidence that particularly for the most
disadvantaged children in those early
years it's not cost-free for them not
going to school there is the cost so if
we can get them back in a way that we
safely can do so we should do so but it
will only be guided by the the evidence
that is moving in the right direction at
the moment but we will would be very
cautious about that Steven is saying
thank you Robert so I was a frontline
doctor for many many years and I
wouldn't discharge a patient from a
hospital into whatever setting home or
care home unless I was absolutely
confident that their medical treatment
was complete and they no longer required
hospital treatment and indeed I think
it's always worth making the point that
particularly for our elderly population
remaining in hospital when your medical
hospital treatment is complete can be
harmful to individuals so I'm absolutely
sure that my medical colleagues would
not be discharging patients under any
circumstances unless they were sure that
their medical treatment in hospital was
complete they were fit for discharge and
it was safe to discharge them
Robert any any follow-ups you want to
ask just on the return of children to
schools and non-essential stores are you
allowing the possibility that this could
happen on a region by region basis
because as I say if there are literally
no new cases in London there's a very
strong argument that even if other parts
of the country are not ready for
children to go back and the rest London
is ready well we want to proceed as fast
as we safely can do so because clearly
there are benefits in the way I
described for children and they've
clearly benefits for the wider economy
and people's your public utility really
of being able to access those those
non-essential retail I think it is best
though and the government has said this
repeatedly that we move as a whole
nation and that would include of course
the whole of England in in doing so it
may be the case that because of the
track and race clearly within within
track and trace if we identify specific
very micro hotspots than then we would
have different measures in respective of
that but the clear intention is that we
move as a whole whole country thank you
for your question now over to Ben
Kentish from LBC thank you sector state
good afternoon three weeks ago on the
steps of Downing Street the Prime
Minister talked to the need for the
maximum possible transparency and
probably promised that the government
would share all its working and thinking
with the British people and yet now
you're asking parents to send their
children back to school without having
published the scientific advice on
whether it is safe for them to do so in
effect asking them to simply take
someone else's word for it if you were a
parent without the benefit of being a
government minister would you want to
see that advice and when will the
government fulfil the Prime Minister's
transparency pledge by publishing it and
just a quick second one if I may under
the government's bereavement scheme the
families of front-line doctors and
nurses who lose their life fighting
coronavirus will be given indefinite
leave to remain in the UK but it was
confirmed last night that the families
of doctor Porter's carers and cleaners
who died in similar circumstances will
not does the government think the lives
of carers Porter's and cleaners are
worth less than those of
and nurses or is there another reason
for that discrepancy thank you okay
thank you for your questions there's two
questions wrapped up in there so I might
resist going back for a further one
after on there in terms of the the point
about parents sending their children at
school I'm a I'm a dad of two primary
school-aged children and I do
of course genuinely understand parents
concerns around this and they will want
to be sure that if they send their
children back to school they do so in a
safe environment but that is why the
Education Secretary has been working so
hard to ensure that we do develop that
safe environment whether that is
staggered entry whether it's washing
hands whether it is having children kept
within groups so that they don't mix
with others all of those are driven by
the evidence about how to do this in
them the most safe way possible we won't
proceed unless we can be sure of
children's safety of course that goes
without saying
in relation to your point about the
publication of the evidence a sage
advice is being published a routinely
and there was some further advice
published on Friday and that will
continue to be the case in respect of
the the points you rightly raised about
support for for care workers and others
first of all just to restate what I said
earlier in this press conference that we
all of us owe a huge debt of gratitude
to everyone working in the NHS we all go
out and clap at eight o'clock on
Thursday evenings to show that
appreciation one of the measures we've
we've taken to show that appreciation is
the bereavement support which is
available to everyone of course
including porters and others who make
such a huge contribution and respect
your point about the indefinite leave to
remain we do keep that policy under
review and we will look further into
that case now I think we'll go over to
Jason Rhodes furniture yes go on quickly
I wondered if professor powers had a
view and whether the bereavement scheme
should be extended to all NHS workers
and just on the school's point a
secretary of state just want to follow
up on Nick's point really will the
contact tracing system be in place
together with the app by the start of
June
as Angela McLean suggested yesterday was
necessary thank you okay so remember
those further points great so in respect
of the the contact tracing that the
prime minister announced a fantastic
progress at lunchtime today we've now
recruited 25,000 contact traces that
will enable us to undertake a 10,000
traces now given that we are currently
at the stage where there's 2,400 cases
that that is a huge progress and that
would be by the beginning of by June the
beginning of June so that that is really
important progress in respective the
indefinite leave to remain I know that
we owe hospitals not that huge debt of
gratitude and that's why I said what I
said about keeping the policy under
review but I it's of anything else
that's a matter for government in terms
of keeping the policy under review but
all I can say is again as a doctor who's
worked on the front line for many years
how much I value the entire
multidisciplinary team so everybody from
Porter to manager to administrator at a
nurse who absolutely work together as a
team in managing this sort of crisis but
also in the day to day care that that
that the NHS provides so it's often the
doctors and nurses who are the the front
and get the praise but believe me there
are a huge number of people working
behind the scenes I was at the Royal
Free when we managed to bola and I will
always remember the photograph in the
Evening Standard that showed the huge
team of people the engineers who kept
the plant open being some of the ones I
remember the most
who kept the the show on the road and
allowed those patients to be treated
successfully and that is the case now
there are many many heroes within the
NHS not just doctors and nurses thank
you now we go on to Jason groves in the
Daily Mail thanks TB the TV's been a
lifeline for lots of older people
through this lockdown I wonder if you're
happy to see the over 75 lose their free
TV license in August and we're
you might intervene or whether that's a
job for the BBC and professor power so I
wonder if I could ask you about the 2
meter bull we heard from Robert Dingwall
who's a comment advisor earlier that the
actual scientific evidence for keeping
us two metres apart while the one is
very fragile I mean has he got a point
you're on Sage given the importance of
that sectors like education and
hospitality could you look at it again
well shall I deal with a BBC TV licence
first that we we were clear and we've
been clear all along that we didn't want
the BBC to take away the free TV licence
from the over 75s I think the BBC made
absolutely the right decision in saying
that in the middle of this coronavirus
crisis when particularly older people
are being asked to self isolate who and
are feeling lonely often the TV is a
lifeline for them it's wouldn't have
been acceptable to take away that that
TV licence which is why they rightly
extended the the proposal for removing
it to the beginning of August I very
much hope that if we are in the similar
situation come the beginning of August
the BBC will show similar flexibility
again so on their on the 2 meter rule so
I can absolutely assure you that Sage
does keep things under review not least
because the science is constantly
evolving and as we learn more about this
virus then it's quite right that a
scientists we consider new evidence and
keep things under review that the
current guidance the current advice is 2
meters I'm sure that along with a whole
host of other things that will
constantly be kept under review as new
evidence emerges many follow-ups to that
tourism is there any chance I was
getting a holiday Britain this summer
and if we if we can would you encourage
thank you staycation yeah look I'd love
to get the tourism sector up as as
quickly as we possibly can we set this
very ambitious plan to try and get it up
and running by the beginning of July
we're working hard to be able to deliver
on that
why I've set up this taskforce I
announced the beginning of this press
conference bringing together experts not
not just the people that I named at the
beginning when you see the full list
there's other people from the tourism
sector who will help advise on that
clearly we can only do it if it's safe
to do so because I think the worst thing
for our tourism sector would be to start
then see the our rate rise out of
control see a second peak overwhelms the
NHS that we then have to slam on the
brakes again but believe me we get to
the point when we can have British
tourism back apart perhaps from the
Prime Minister you won't find a bigger
champion of a great British break than
me thank you over to Jane Kirby for PA
good afternoon many football fans are
hoping that the Premier League will
return next month well the government be
asking that these matches are available
on free-to-air terrestrial television or
is it acceptable for existing rights
holders such as Sky and BT just to
stream the matches on their YouTube
platforms and is an inviting with these
matches are shown on terrestrial to
encourage people to adhere to the
lockdown and a perfect a question for
professor Paris please all antibody
testing antibody tests are becoming much
more widely available on commercial
websites should people be buying these
tests to use at home or is the intention
that they will get win via the NHS for
free at some point and if so when might
be well so I take the the Premier League
first so as I said several times before
I'm really keen that if we can get the
Premier League back behind closed doors
we should do that the process for doing
this is really threefold so first of all
we've already issued the guidance for
carrying out training behind closed
doors that's non-contact training that
those guidelines have already been
published earlier this week I hope
subject to the sign-off by public health
England and others we will then later
this week very shortly get the guidance
about how we can have training in a
contact environment this is for elite
sports so they can start to build up the
final stage would then be the the
guidelines as to whether they can resume
behind closed doors in doing that we've
been guided by the health
device can update you again today for
the fourth time there were meetings
between elite sports and public health
England to find out how we can do it
safely if we can do it safely I'd like
us to be able to get it up and running
towards a mid mid-june if that's
possible in respect of broadcasting
rights we have to respect the existing
rights that the broadcasters have but I
do think we've actually got some
flexibility because if you look at the
on Saturday afternoons it has been the
case that Premier League matches can't
be broadcast on broadcasters the idea
was that they would be able to watch
people be able to watch them in the
stadium so they didn't want to compete
okay that won't be possible if we
compete behind closed doors I think that
creates an opportunity for us to be able
to get some sport some Premier League
free to air those discussions are
ongoing I'm having productive
discussions a couple of weeks ago now
had the latest one with Premier League
the AFL and with the the FA I hope we
can consult this out and I also hope
then we can get some more money going
into the the sport of football I think
we can find ourselves in a win-win
situation and thank you the question on
antibody testing so public health
England have been evaluating the new
antibody tests the commercial tests that
are becoming available and I would have
most confidence in that evaluation
process because I think that gives it
the stamp that we need in order to roll
these tests out throughout the NHS so as
those tests are evaluated they become
available they will be rolled out
through health and social care settings
initially they use will be in those
settings and also for surveillance
within the community so that we get some
information on how many people are in in
the population may have been infected by
the virus so that is where we will start
from I would caution against using any
or using any tests that might be made
available without knowing quite how good
those tests are so public health England
as I say is evaluating them for the NHS
are we
caution people against being tempted to
have those tests I think one other point
to make about the antibody test the
antibody test shows you that you have
had the virus once you have the virus
the body's immune system develops
antibodies against it emits those
antibodies that are detected typically a
number of weeks after you've had the
virus Hotel you've had it what we don't
absolutely know at the moment is whether
having antibodies and having the
antibodies that are tested in those
tests means that you won't get the virus
again we will only know that over time
through the science of understanding the
type of antibody that's being produced
but also by following people over time
to see that when you develop an antibody
and you test positive for an antibody
whether you get the virus again so what
I wouldn't want people to think is just
because you test positive for the
antibody that it necessarily means that
you can do something different in terms
of social distancing all the way you
behave because until we are absolutely
sure about the relationship between the
positive antibody test and immunity I
think we as scientists would say we need
to trade cautiously going further
forward that information will become
available over time but it will take
some time to get there thank you Jane do
you have any follow-up professor Parris
and does he mean by that that we can say
that everybody in the country will get
access to an antibody test by the NHS
for free and are there any discussions
going on at the moment and for a
timeline for that would be no end of
this year next year or so on so what I
would say is exactly what I say it is
that we're at an early phase of these
tests and where we will use them first
is in health and probably social care
settings for patients obviously but also
for the staff in those settings where it
is most important that we understand
about the infection thank you Jane and
finally to Mike Brown from Teesside
Gazette thank you good afternoon I with
Middlesbrough has the currently the
fourth highest infection rates for
coronavirus in the country by population
it has the highest mortality rate in the
north
and council leaders believe that its
current our rate is around 0.85 people
in Middlesbrough can't sit on a park
bench in their local park because our
mayor believes that the risk from
coronavirus is still too high of two
questions firstly for the Secretary of
State
previously local micro lockdowns have
been discussed to tackle areas where
there's a significant spike in new cases
can you tell me what specific work the
government is doing to prepare
vulnerable and hard-hit areas like
Middlesbrough for a future significant
spike in cases once lockdown measures
are eased and how do you expect local
authorities and public health teams to
be able to enforce those secondly for
professor powers one council auntie side
has already said it will not reopen
schools on June the 1st due to our
higher than average rate of infection in
the northeast does the UK's
one-size-fits-all policy for reopening
schools on June the 1st will that work
in places like Middlesbrough and the
rest of Teesside and how confident is
the government that our already high our
rates won't go back over one once
schools are reopened well thank you and
thank you for your question as and
there's a the secretary state
responsible the media it's great to hear
the tea side cause it asking a question
at the press conference first of all you
asked about how we would protect the
most vulnerable I I'm under no illusions
and the government is under no illusions
about the challenges for the economy of
the necessary measures we've had to take
to protect the NHS and save lives in
terms of them the measures that we have
taken they've been very tough on the
economy social distancing and so on
that's why the Chancellor has announced
an unprecedented package of measures to
support people through these hard times
for example the job retention scheme
meaning that literally millions of
people who would otherwise have been
made redundant have been able to to keep
their jobs and that's millions of
families that still have earners in
their household so we are we are working
hard
through all of that on the point about
local authorities and enforcing and the
point about schools I really hope that
as as we go through this we can do so in
a constructive spirit whereby we can
move together as a whole whole country
and get children back to school for the
the reasons that I set out and I do
genuinely understand and really
understand the concerns of teachers I
understand the concerns of parents about
whether this is safe to do so that is
why we are working so closely with them
but I think the way to do this is to to
do so in a constructive spirit of
engagement I think on your your final
point about maybe you're someone in
individual outbreaks that is why we're
working so hard on the the track and
trace the fact we've made this this
progress already means that we will be
able to if there is outbreaks it's
important to understand what this track
and race means it means that if we find
someone's been infected by tracing we
can find out who else they have been in
contact with and get those people to
self isolate and in that way control the
spread of the virus and I think that's a
very important measure Steven yes so
thank you for the question so I think
the first point is of course on the are
number as long as it is below one it
means that the amount of infection in
the community is reducing it's simply
that the lower it is the faster that it
is reducing and the nearer it is to warn
the slow rate is reducing but it is
still reducing so as long as it is below
one over time you will we will see
reductions in the number of infection in
the community I think that's a really
important point to make secondly I said
I've said before it's its usual in
infections and in epidemics to see
variation by geography so for instance
in the flu season that we have every
winter we see an increase in the number
of flu cases it's very typical to see
that flu picks up and falls in different
parts of the country at different times
during the winter so that is a very sort
of natural pattern to an infectious
disease clearly it's important that we
have national measures in terms of
lockdown measures and social distancing
and I think that is
best way overall to approach this but as
we get to a point where we are talking
about individual outbreaks then there
will be a need for interventions around
those outbreaks and in fact that's no
different from the public health
response that occurs for any outbreak of
an infectious disease a set of measures
will be taken by Public Health
colleagues either in local councils or
with public health England to ensure
that a particular outbreak in a
particular area is taken under control
so so I think that is that is well tried
and tested public health policy contact
tracing is part of that well tried and
tested public health policy and I think
as we move forward in the months ahead
that is the sort of approach around
outbreaks specific outbreaks in in
defined communities that the public help
my public health health colleagues will
increasingly be using thank you Mike any
follow-ups
yeah please Secretariat you mentioned
the the package that has been brought
forward already to support local
authorities through the through the
pandemic once this once were through the
other side of this does the government
need to make towns like Middlesbrough
and other disadvantaged areas in the
northeast a priority and so that were
not as hard as hard hit as we have been
in the last ten years of public spending
cuts a link between deprivation and
mortality rates in coronavirus has
already been established by the US yes
it's a good question now I know that the
Prime Minister is passionate about this
this is why we are committing record
investment where that is levelling up
the funding for schools so that areas of
the country of impasse been less well
funded for their schools compared to say
London we're increasing their funding
that's why we're investing in transport
infrastructure the road and the rails
and indeed in my own area I'm passionate
about making sure that outside of London
and the South East people get the same
opportunity for for cultural experiences
and we invest in cultural experiences in
a way that perhaps in the past we've
focused too much on London so that it's
very much
important part of the work we're doing
thank you for your question thank you
everyone that now concludes the press
conference and indeed that is the end of
today's daily downing street press
briefing from the government led today
by the culture secretary Oliver Dowd and
let's take a look now at the key
developments he began by saying that
over 177,000 coronavirus tests were
carried out in the UK in the past 24
hours that is the biggest daily total to
date this doesn't however correspond to
the number of people actually tested as
some individuals are tested more than
once mr. Dalton also announced the
latest death toll of 35,000 seven
hundred and four that's a rise of three
hundred and sixty three on yesterday the
culture secretary also pledged a hundred
and fifty million pounds from dormant
bank accounts to help charities respond
to the pandemic and a new task force to
help sport and the creativity's prepare
to get back on their feet will be
announced among those who will be
involved include the former footballer
alex scott the former itv boss Michael
grade and the English National Ballet
'he's tomorrow
rahu well with me now
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News